Hey, this is Radiolab. I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich.
Oh yes. Would you like to say our topic? Robert? Our topic today is goodness,
niceness, altruism in there. Bigger, fatter word. Yup.
Thus far we've met a couple of folks,
individuals who have struggled with altruism in some way. No,
we're going to sort of pull back and go from specifics to grand global
strategy. Yes. Hello. Hello, hello.
And we're going to tell you a really cool story we think that begins with this
guy. My name is Robert Rod.
I'm the Walgreen professor for the study of human understanding and the
Department of Political Science and the Ford School of public policy of the
University of Michigan.
I know that's a mouth that was like your dean was like looking over years as
well. You know,
you could just say I'm a professor of public policy and political science or
something.
Well, but before he was all of that extra rod when he was in high school,
he was one of those guys who just loved computers.
Well, yes,
in 59 1960 I hung around the Northwestern university computer center.
59 60 so what were those large pieces of furniture in the building?
They were, in fact, the hall campus had one computer and they,
let me use it for 15 minutes here in 15 minutes there.
And what would you do with the, with the computer?
What I did was I did a very simple computer simulation of hypothetical lifeforms
and environments for a science project. Really? Yeah.
You're a pre geek is what you are. Before the word had been invented,
I can't think you could say that,
but then in 1962 when Axelrod was down on computer baseball,
you got somewhere all over the world.
Everybody else was watching one of the great dramas in modern times.
Good evening, Mike [inaudible]
unfolding the Cuban missile crisis
past week.
Unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive
missile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned island
and Axelrod. Rod started thinking about the dilemma we were in. Well,
each side wants to spend more money buying missiles and things.
You know, we could build more bombs, but then they could build more bombs.
It would be better if they would both stop. But if we stop and they don't,
that'd be bad. Very bad.
Yeah. And so I was interested in what's, uh,
what were the conditions that would allow people to get out of this problem?
And then he starts thinking, well wait,
maybe I could use my computer to help me figure out what's a good strategy for
this, for something like the Cuban missile crisis. Well, yes. Right.
And what made you think that computers could help with that? Well,
I came across a simple game called the prisoners to run the
noise from the window. Okay. So the business
dilemma is a very famous thought experiment. It's a little tricky to describe,
but I got a friend of mine, Andrew Zali,
who's written about the prisoner's dilemma and an upcoming book resilience,
the Science of why things bounce back. I got him to lay it out for me.
What is the prisoner's dilemma?
So imagine that two bank robbers are hanging out across the street from the
first national bank and uh, the police pick them up.
They've received a tip that these two guys are about to rob the bank. Get it.
Yep. So the cops take these two guys back to the station,
do the whole law and order thing, put them in different rooms.
They walk into each one,
let's call them lucky and Joe and they say to lucky,
we have enough to make sure that you go away for a six month sentence.
But this is not really what the cops want.
They want a longer sentence for one of these guys.
And so they make lucky an offer.
If you lucky rat out Joe and Joe doesn't say anything,
you will go free and Joe will go to jail for 10 years.
[inaudible]
if the reverse happens, meaning if you say nothing and Joe Rats you out,
you're going to jail for 10 years and he's going to walk free.
[inaudible]
both ended up ratting on each other. You both get five, five years.
Whereas if you both keep your mouth shut,
you're each going to jail for six months for loitering.
Just somehow if lucky and Joe could talk to each other,
they both say don't speak. Absolutely.
But the big problem that lucky and Joe have is they can't talk to each other.
All right, so you're lucky. Okay. Okay. What do you do?
Do you rat Joe out or no. Do I know this guy
at all? I mean you met for this one job,
but tomorrow you'll never see him again. Ever. Ever. Well, okay. If I,
if I knew him and I could trust him, then I think I know what I would do.
But keep the mouth shut.
I wouldn't get six months cause he'd keep his mouth shut.
It would be a sweet thing indeed. But see, since I don't know. No matter. Well,
what would it happen to? He rats me out. You'd go to jail for 10 years.
He'd go fried bastard. 10 years. Yeah.
But if I read him out in the worst I get is five years or you know,
I go wait free. I'm totally free. Do it. I guess. Say what's in your heart?
I'm going to, I'm throwing him under the bus. Yes.
[inaudible] what's his name again? Joe. Joe [inaudible]. He's already gone.
[inaudible] you're dead to me, Joe.
So you see in this type of scenario where you don't know the guy,
you have a very strong incentive to wrap the other guy out.
Or as the social scientists would say to defect. That's right.
If you play it only once, if you only meet somebody once,
whatever the other guy does,
you're better off defecting against them just to your on out.
Whenever you hear the word defect, no, that it means screw the other guy over.
But the really interesting stuff happens if you play over and over again.
If you get to meet the same people again because now you're thinking,
should I help this guy out the next time? If he screwed me, should I screw him?
But the secret swept extraordinary build up of communist missiles.
What do you do? You want to cooperate, but you don't want to get screwed,
which cannot be accepted by this country. Right, right.
You know,
these kinds of thoughts were paramount in those days because the prisoner's
dilemma was being played between the two superpowers.
This is our friend Steve Strogatz, the Cornell mathematician who says at that
time, well kinds of folks,
political scientists and economists and psychologists,
mathematicians were writing papers about the prisoner's dilemma.
We have to really in thinking, come on,
we've got to be able to win this game if we're going to play against the
Russians and we have to do it. Right. Exactly.
But there was no consensus on the best way to do it.
And so I was interested in what's, uh, what's a good strategy for this?
And that's when Robert Axelrod's sitting down there in the basement somewhere in
the Midwest with the big computer, that's when he had his idea.
His approach, which was really novel at the time,
was to conduct a computer tournament. The computer terminal.
Yeah.
Invite the people that had come up with these different ideas to play with each
other. In other words, what he said is, uh, all right, Mr DWIs guy. You know,
you've written so and so many articles on the prisoner's dilemma.
You think you understand it.
How about joining this tournament where you have to submit a program that will
play prisoner's dilemma against program's submitted by the other experts.
And we'll have a round Robin, try these different programs against each other.
So all these computer guys are brought to Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas and we
had Tuxedos and they all sat down at the table. No, it's a nice image.
But what really happened was everyone submitted their programs to axle Rod.
They would mail their entries to leave, but there was a trophy,
there wasn't trophy. So I wrote to people and I said, if you went,
I'll send you a trophy. You know,
little plaque that says you won the computer tournament. Yeah. Okay.
So here's the deal.
Every program will play every other program 200 times.
There will be points in each round.
And then actual rod will total the scores and see what actually works by which
he means in the long run. Even if you lose some rounds here and there,
one of these strategies is going to beat all the others.
Meaning it'll let you survive, maybe even prosper.
That's the game. That's right. And, uh,
can you introduce us to some of the contestants? Yeah.
So there was one program called massive retaliatory strike and the first move it
just cooperates. But then as soon as the other program doesn't cooperate,
it would then retaliate for the rest of the [inaudible].
Yes.
Sorry man, you blew it and never trust you again. Yeah, that's it for you.
This is like the way my wife is.
Whenever a guy in her earlier life stood her up, that was it. Game over.
But there were also some trickier program.
I mean some crafty ones try to make a model of the opponent,
like you mentioned one that was called Tester. So tester would,
would see what you were like. It would start by being mean.
And then
if you start retaliating, it backs off and says, you know, Ho chill.
It's okay man. And you know,
and then starts cooperating for awhile until it throws in another [inaudible]
[inaudible]
the other guy goes after all it called Tester. Yeah.
So test your guys kind of designed to see how much it could get away with.
I mean, it sounds kind sensible in a way.
I mean mean, but if you see,
if you think about what happens if these two players play each other,
if tester plays massive retaliation 200 times,
pretty soon the tester will defect and then massive retaliation.
Yeah. Never cooperate again to you.
Let's go back.
Typically I do very badly both of them. When you're sitting there,
did you have a hunch as to which would be the most successful program or I
didn't know and which is why I wanted to do it. Uh, but I did have a, uh,
a hunch that, you know,
thousands or tens of thousands of lines of code would be needed to have a pretty
competent program.
So when the mailman delivers the fattest envelope to your house,
do you like this could be the one they have? Well, yes. Right. Um,
now it didn't turn out that way
when it was all said and done.
When he loaded all the programs into the computer when they'd all played each
other 200 times the program, that one
[inaudible]
it's really two lines of code. Two lines of code. Yeah. It's got a simple name.
It's called tit for tat first line of code.
Be Nice. Nice. Yeah. Nice. Nice.
As a technical word in this game,
nice means I never am nasty first.
And after that second line of code,
it just does what the other player did on the previous move.
So if the other player has just cooperated, it'll cooperate.
And if the other player has just affected, it'll defect.
It retaliates on the next move. Couldn't be clearer. On the other hand,
it only retaliates that one time. I mean, unless provoked further, it does.
It's retaliation and now bygones be bygones. And that's it. So, wait,
how exactly did it win? I mean, can you give us a sense of, of why it one? Okay,
so let's suppose I'm here. Let's take an extreme case of, um,
some very simple programs. One of them, I'll call Jesus
for the sake of the name,
the Jesus Program cooperates on every turn that is, it's always, it's always,
you know, good. Yes. So the Jesus program is a simple algorithm that says,
always be good. Good, good, good, good, good. That's right.
And let's say the other program is the Lucifer program, which um,
no matter what, always [inaudible] is bad. Okay? These are your two extremes.
CST from, of course,
most programs and those people fall somewhere in the middle,
right there in tit for tat. You've got a strategy that can swing both ways.
For instance, with Jesus, tit for tat starts by cooperating,
asked us Jesus,
oh,
and then they're going to keep cooperating
[inaudible]
for the whole 200 round, which is, you know, good.
But now let's suppose it plays Lucifer where there's no chance to cooperate.
Then says Steve Tit for tat just plays good defense.
So when Lucifer does his thing, TIF
atop retaliate,
pretty much keep doing that and stay even. So in other words,
it's, it's, it's a very robust program. It elicits cooperation.
If the opponent has any inclination to cooperate,
but it doesn't take any guff and it wins. So you might say,
in evolutionary terms, this program is the fittest.
So actually axle rod played an evolutionary version of his tournament. That is,
he had these programs after they played their tournament,
get a chance to reproduce copies of themselves according to how well they did.
You mean the winners who get to have more babies? Yeah.
And then with the babies play each other. Yeah, he ran them again.
I mean he ran them for many generations.
And so like suppose you have a world of Lucifer's and there are a few tit for
tat players out there. Can they thrive?
Can cooperation emerge in this horribly hostile world?
I would an interesting question.
So he looked at that and the answer was if you have enough of them so that they
have enough chance of meeting each other and they can actually invade and take
over the world, even if the world starts horribly mean.
I mean, what would I take to be the big message though?
I mean what always sent chills down my spine
[inaudible]
which is that we see this version of morality around the world.
Yeah. Be Upright. Forgiving but retaliatory.
I mean that sounds to me like the Old Testament. No,
it's not turn the other cheek. It's an eye for an eye.
But not 10 eyes for an eye and to think that it's not something that's handed
down by our teachers or by God, but that it's something that came from biology.
I liked that
argument personally.
[inaudible]
oh, from biology. Now,
do we know whether the math has anything to do with real people in real life
situations or are we just abstracting behavior?
Is this wise or is this just math?
This, this is what's so impressive to me about Axel Rod's work.
So he's not just playing math games. He,
he tries to tie this to history and politics as scene.
I like to scan journals. What am I happy to say? It's past Angus.
It's part of my profession.
But I came across a book called the live and let live system in world war one.
So here's where we jump away from the math and the computer tournaments and into
something very real.
The word began late in July,
1914 that stand the only wine trail expert in world war one. Evan Pugh,
professor emeritus at Penn state mystery. That stands going to help us tell.
It takes place on what was called the western front,
which was basically these two lines of trenches, very close to each other,
a few hundred yards apart,
and they stretch for hundreds of miles and that fall in November,
the weather turned bad, heavy rains.
Then it became IC
and then slush and then snow.
It became disgusting because the trenches also were filled with rats,
rats, the rats when after not only the food but after corpses,
and it was oddly in this miserable,
disgusting hell hole that something quite amazing happened.
No one quite knows how it started, but one day, maybe you're on daybreak,
let's say while the two sides were fighting some of the [inaudible],
British soldiers stopped firing long enough to have breakfast
and as they're eating they noticed, hm, the German stuff too,
to have their breakfast. When they're both done,
they'd begin firing again next morning. Same thing.
British take their breakfast break at about the same time.
The Germans do the same thing morning after that,
the same thing and then the next and after a while
both sides caught on. Now, if they didn't interrupt the other one,
then they wouldn't be interrupted.
On the whole, there is silence.
This is from a letter. British soldiers sent home to his wife at the time.
After all, if you prevent your enemy from drawing his rations,
his remedy is simple. He will prevent you from drawing yours.
When Axlerod read this,
I thought, gee, this sounds very familiar.
Line one, if tit for tat be nice first.
Now the Brits probably didn't mean to be nice first when they started the
breakfast truce, but it happened and then the Germans reciprocated,
which is line two.
Now keep in mind these two sides are at war and implicit in line two is a
threat. You mess with me, I'm going to mess with you.
Well, think about snipers for example.
So there's letters where they a explained where the snipers would shoot at a
tree over and over and over again showing that in fact they were really
accurate. Meaning that if they wanted to kill you, they'd get you.
And this was going on during the breakfast truce and these little agreements,
you know, like, I'm going to be nice to you, but I could kick your ass.
Don't forget. Well,
these little truces spread all up and down the western front until things really
changed. Fast forward to December,
Christmas Eve, the climate was just about freezing on Christmas Eve.
And the Germans had a tradition of a tabletop, Christmas trees,
small trees for weeks.
He said the German government had been shipping small trees literally to the
trenches, hundreds and hundreds of trees.
And that night on Christmas Eve at dusk,
the Germans began putting up their trees,
mounted them on the rim in their trench and lit candles on them singing
Christmas carols.
Uh,
the British who might've been no more than 50 or 70 yards away,
crawled forward and to no man's land to see better. And then they responded.
Here's a letter from a German soldier sent home to his family,
which describes what happened next.
I shouted to our enemies that we didn't wish to shoot.
I said we could speak
to each other. At first there was silence.
And then very slowly out of the darkness the British guys approached and so we
came together and shook hands. This is, see,
this is where I start to think, uh, are you making this up?
Because this is where it starts to sound sort of crazy to me.
That's a pat Walters, our producer.
It sounds as if this was being made up and the result was for many decades,
people assumed that this was just myth that couldn't possibly have happened,
but we know it had happened because we have the letters that the British and the
German sent back home. We know that they met in darkness and decided,
why don't we have a truth? In the morning,
next morning, thousands of soldiers put down their rifles,
climbed out of their trenches into no man's land and started hanging out with
each other.
A lot of us went over and talked to them and this lasted the whole morning.
I [inaudible]
to several of them and I must say they seemed extraordinarily fine.
Men soldiers got together, started fires, Cook Christmas dinners,
swapped precedence, and drank.
The Germans hauled out these enormous IROs and beer. They traded stuff,
cigars and trinkets even help one another.
Very the dead and in some places on the western front.
This period of goodwill lasted a whole week,
but then the general's found out, yeah,
they were very angry about this and he said,
if we didn't send you to the front to to be nice to the other guys,
we sent him to kill him. If the general says, Hey,
I want you to shoot those Germans, that's an order,
well then they wouldn't that, oh gee, sorry. Generally I missed,
but I'll try again better next time. I see the way the general is fine.
They figured out how to disrupt this whole thing as they would said, okay,
you guys go out on a raid and I want you to bring back a prisoner or a corpse.
In other words,
show me a scalp that's in order and that messed things up or royally
[inaudible].
Here's a letter from a British soldier whose unit contained a band which was
apparently pretty common.
He writes this letter about one of the moments when the truce vanished.
At six minutes to midnight, the band open with the voc Tom Ryan,
which is a German patriotic anthem. So some of the Germans,
according to this letter,
climbed up onto the rim of their trench to listen to this English band playing
their song.
[inaudible]
then there's the last note sound. Yeah.
Every grenade firing rifle,
trench mortar and bomb throwing machine let fly simultaneously into the German
trench.
So you can imagine the Germans that weren't killed would have felt betrayed.
They had just been hanging out with these guys and the next night they would
have attacked back and the British would have attacked them back and then the
Germans would have retaliated against them and on and on and on,
and it would kind of echo back and forth forever. And that's what happened.
There were immense casualties,
uh, uh, as many as 50,000 casualties in a day.
And this says Axelrod is where you see sort of the dark side of different tech.
What are the weaknesses of the tit for tat strategy?
Or one of the problems with it is these echoes,
not just that goes of good obviously, but echoes of violence could get bad.
So what I found though was that instead of playing pure tit for tat where you
always defect if the other guy defects, there are certain circumstances,
he says this I find completely fascinating where you want to modify that second
line of code so that you're not always retaliating,
you're nearly always retaliated, right?
If you were a little bit generous,
which by which I mean say 10% of the time you don't effect,
then what happens is that these echoes will stop and I would call that generous
tit for tat.
So this is kind of interesting like we started with Moses, you know,
eye for an eye, but you were saying maybe for every nine parts Moses,
you need one part. Jesus meaning like turning the other turn the other cheek.
It sounds like you've described like a cooking recipe or something like nine
parts. Once you have attracted it, it's kind of a recipe.
It's a recipe for life, but it isn't a recipe that ignores the deep fact of it.
Look, if I were punching you in the face right now, what are you going to do?
I'm gonna Punch you back. Yeah, and I'm going to punch you back.
You Punch me back on where you back.
Then we're in pain and somehow in the middle of being blasted by my powerful
fist, you have to come up with the moral courage to say,
I think I'm going to kiss this guy now, and that is not he as you well know.
That is not an easy thing to do. All right, but you, you making it all personal.
My point is if you zoom out,
this is a strategies that just seems to be woven into the fabric of the cosmos.
It works for computers, it works for people. It probably works for Amoeba. Okay.
It just works. And you think that exists on some higher plane? I do. I do.
I don't. I think this is still, as you just called it, very personal.
I think a person has to choose to be kind and make that choice.
Right now and then, okay. You don't know. You're irritating me.
I'm going to say to you, Robert, you look very nice today.
You know what I'm going to do to you?
All right. Well, enough of this radiolab.org is our online home.
You can read lots of stuff there and you can subscribe to our podcast. It's ww.
It's implied. Yeah.